<code><pre>S E C R E T MANAMA 000642 
 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/04/2019 
TAGS: <a href='/tag/PREL_0.html'>PREL</a> <a href='/tag/MARR_0.html'>MARR</a> <a href='/tag/ENRG_0.html'>ENRG</a> <a href='/tag/BA_0.html'>BA</a> <a href='/tag/AF_0.html'>AF</a> <a href='/tag/IZ_0.html'>IZ</a> <a href='/tag/IR_0.html'>IR</a> <a href='/tag/NATO_0.html'>NATO</a>
SUBJECT: GENERAL PETRAEUS WITH KING HAMAD: IRAQ, 
AFGHANISTAN, IRAN, NATO AWACS, ENERGY 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Adam Ereli, reasons 1.4(b) and (d). 
 
 
<a id='par1' href='#par1'>Â¶</a>1. (C) SUMMARY: In an hour-long meeting on November 1 with 
CENTCOM Commander General Petraeus, Bahrain's King Hamad said 
Arab states need to do more to engage Iraq, discussed 
Afghanistan and the positive role India could play, urged 
action to stop Iran's nuclear program, and reviewed regional 
plans for the peaceful use of nuclear energy. END SUMMARY. 
 
2.(C) IRAQ: King Hamad fully endorsed General Petraeus's 
point that increased Arab engagement and influence would help 
frustrate Iranian designs in Iraq. He added that the Arabs 
need Egyptian and Saudi leadership in this matter and that he 
had tried to make this point to the Saudi government, but 
with little effect. 
 
3.(C) AFGHANISTAN: General Petraeus praised Bahrain's 
commitment of a police company for internal security at FOB 
Leatherneck. King Hamad confirmed that he would personally 
see the force off at the airport on December 16. This date 
will be the 10th anniversary of the King's assuming the 
throne, and General Petraeus said that U.S. air assets would 
be available on the 16th to transport the company to 
Afghanistan. King Hamad inquired about the extent of India's 
involvement in Afghanistan and noted that Bahrain saw India 
as very positive force in the region. "It's a new era," he 
said. "They can be of great help." 
 
4.(C) IRAN: King Hamad pointed to Iran as the source of much 
of the trouble in both Iraq and Afghanistan. He argued 
forcefully for taking action to terminate their nuclear 
program, by whatever means necessary. "That program must be 
stopped," he said. "The danger of letting it go on is greater 
than the danger of stopping it."  King Hamad added that in 
light of these regional developments, Bahrain was working to 
strengthen GCC coordination and its relations with allies and 
international organizations. He specifically mentioned NATO 
and confirmed that Bahrain had agreed to the Alliance's 
request to use Isa Airbase for AWACS missions, although the 
detail on numbers and timing have yet to be discussed. 
 
5.(S/NF) BAHRAIN AIR SHOW AND NUCLEAR ENERGY: King Hamad 
asked General Petraeus for his help in encouraging U.S. 
aircraft manufacturers to participate in the inaugural 
Bahrain Air Show, scheduled for January 2010. He said that 
France was pushing the Rafale and would be there in force, 
although he agreed with Petraeus that the French fighter was 
yesterday's technology. Warming to the subject of French 
commercial diplomacy and referring to President Sarkozy, King 
Hamad said, "The UAE will give him a hard time soon," over 
France's proposed deal for nuclear reactors. "They're not 
happy with the project he's offered them." King Hamad also 
mentioned that Bahrain was studying options for using nuclear 
power to generate electricity. He said he had asked the 
Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Interior and Public Works to 
present him recommendations and invited the Ambassador to 
discuss with them possible U.S. involvement. Post will do so. 
 
ERELI</pre></code>
