<code><pre>UNCLAS STATE 100175 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: <a href='/tag/PREL_0.html'>PREL</a> <a href='/tag/KPKO_0.html'>KPKO</a> <a href='/tag/IC_0.html'>IC</a>
SUBJECT: COTE D'IVOIRE:  PRESIDENTIAL STATEMENT 
 
<a id='par1' href='#par1'>¶</a>1. (U) USUN is authorized to join consensus on issuance of a 
Presidential Statement on September 29, expressing concern at 
delays in preparations for the November 29 presidential and 
parliamentary elections in Cote d'Ivoire, and urging the 
Ivorian parties to respect their commitment to the electoral 
timeline.  Mission should consult with Washington if there 
are any substantive changes to the text of the Statement 
(paragraph 2). 
 
<a id='par2' href='#par2'>¶</a>2. (U)  Begin text: 
 
(1) The Security Council reiterates its full support to the 
Ougadougou political process and to the electoral timeline 
endorsed by all the main Ivorian political actors and leading 
to the first round of open, free, fair and transparent 
presidential elections on 29 November 2009.  It commends the 
Facilitator, President Blaise Compaore of Burkina Faso, for 
his continued efforts to support the peace process in Cote 
d'Ivoire. 
 
(2) The Security Council further reiterates its determination 
to bring its full support to a credible electoral process and 
highlights the importance of an inclusive participation of 
the Ivorian civil society. It stresses that it has extended 
to this end the mandate and the troop level of the United 
Nations Operation in Cte d,Ivoire (UNOCI), most recently in 
its resolution 1880 (2009).  It further stresses that it 
expressed in this resolution its intention to authorize the 
Secretary-General to redeploy troops, as may be needed, 
between the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and 
UNOCI. 
 
(3) The Security Council expresses its concern at the delayed 
publication of the provisional voters list, and highlights 
that further delays in the publication of the voters list may 
put at risk the timeline for open, free, fair and transparent 
presidential elections. 
 
(4) The Security Council recalls that the Ivorian political 
actors are bound to respect the electoral timeline.  It urges 
all Ivorian political actors to comply fully with their 
commitments, in order for the voters list to be published in 
the next weeks in the framework of a transparent and 
inclusive process.  It recalls that the Special 
Representative of the Secretary General will certify the 
voters list explicitly. 
 
(5) The Security Council will review the situation by 15 
October 2009, consistent with its resolution 1880 (2009). It 
expresses its intention to react as appropriate towards those 
who would be accountable for blocking the progress of the 
electoral process.  It further expresses its intention to 
launch an active reflection on the future direction of UNOCI 
by reviewing its mandate and the benchmarks for a possible 
drawdown of the operation by 15 October in light of the 
progress of the electoral process.  It stresses that UNOCI's 
presence in Cote d'Ivoire is temporary. 
 
End text. 
CLINTON</pre></code>
